Errors in requirements specifications have been identified
as a major contributor to costly software project failures. It
would be highly beneficial if information systems developers could
verify requirements by predicting workplace acceptance of a new
system based on user evaluations of its specifications measured
during the earliest stages of the development project, ideally before
building a working prototype. However, conventional wisdom
among system developers asserts that prospective users must have
direct hands-on experience with at least a working prototype of a
new system before they can provide assessments that accurately
reflect future usage behavior after workplace implementation.
The present research demonstrates that this assumption is only
partially true. Specifically, it is true that stable and predictive
assessments of a system’s perceived ease of use should be based
on direct behavioral experience using the system. However, stable
and behaviorally predictive measures of perceived usefulness can
be captured from target users who have received information
about a system’s functionality, but have not had direct hands-on
usage experience. This distinction is key because, compared to
ease of use, usefulness is generally much more strongly linked
to future usage intentions and behaviors in the workplace. Two
longitudinal field experiments show that preprototype usefulness
measures can closely approximate hands-on based usefulness
measures, and are significantly predictive of usage intentions
and behavior up to six months after workplace implementation.
The present findings open the door toward research on how
user acceptance testing may be done much earlier in the system
development process than has traditionally been the case. Such
preprototype user acceptance tests have greater informational
value than their postprototype counterparts because they are
captured when only a relatively small proportion of project costs
have been incurred and there is greater flexibility to modify a new
system’s design attributes. Implications are discussed for future
research to confirm the robustness of the present findings and
to better understand the practical potential and limitations of
preprototype user acceptance testing.
Index Terms—Early user acceptance testing, IT project failure,
new technology implementation, technology acceptance model
(TAM).