Abstract
In this article, we describe a taxonomy of generic graph related tasks along with
a computer-based evaluation designed to assess the readability of two
representations of graphs: matrix-based representations and node-link diagrams.
This evaluation encompasses seven generic tasks and leads to insightful
recommendations for the representation of graphs according to their size and
density. Typically, we show that when graphs are bigger than twenty vertices,
the matrix-based visualization outperforms node-link diagrams on most tasks.
Only path finding is consistently in favor of node-link diagrams throughout the
evaluation.
Information Visualization (2005) 4, 114–135. doi:10.1057/palgrave.ivs.9500092
Keywords: Visualization of graphs; adjacency matrices; node-link representation; readability;
evaluation
Introduction
Node-link diagrams have often been used to represent graphs. In the graph
drawing community, many publications deal with layout techniques
complying with aesthetic rules such as minimizing the number of edgecrossings,
minimizing the ratio between the longest edge and the shortest
edge, and revealing symmetries.1 Most works strive to optimize algorithms
complying with such rules, but they rarely try and validate them from a
cognitive point of view. Recently, Purchase et al.2 tackled this problem
through on-paper and online experiments.3,4 These works involved small
handcrafted graphs (graphs with 20 vertices and 20–30 edges), five
aesthetic criteria and eight graph layout algorithms. The authors point
out that while some aesthetic criteria taken separately may improve the
perception of the graph at hand, it is difficult to claim that an algorithm
brings about such an improvement. Moreover,Ware and Purchase5 set up a
study aimed at the validation of some aesthetic properties put forth in the
graph drawing community, such as the influence of good continuity on
the perception of paths. In the Information Visualization (Infovis)
community, many node-link variants have been experimented, both in
2D and 3D.6,7 However, as soon as the size of the graph or the link density
increases, all these techniques face occlusion problems due to links
overlapping (Figure 1A). Thus, it becomes difficult for users to visually
explore the graph or interact with its elements.
Conversely, matrix-based visualizations of graphs eliminate altogether
occlusion problems and provide an outstanding potential, despite their
lack of familiarity to most users. In this paper, we present an evaluation