Abstract This article summarises the current state of research into multiple
tree visualisations. It discusses the spectrum of current representation techniques
used on single trees, pairs of trees and finally multiple trees, in order
to identify which representations are best suited to particular tasks and to find
gaps in the representation space, in which opportunities for future multiple
tree visualisation research may exist. The application areas from where
multiple tree data are derived are enumerated, and the distinct structures that
multiple trees make in combination with each other and the effect on subsequent
approaches to their visualisation are discussed, along with the basic
high-level goals of existing multiple tree visualisations.
Information Visualization (2010) 9, 235--252. doi:10.1057/ivs.2009.29;
published online 5 November 2009
Keywords: multiple trees; layout techniques; survey
Introduction
Tree visualisation has been one of the staples of Information Visualisation
(IV) since its inception, inspiring myriad variations in terms of layout styles
and interaction techniques. The bulk of this research has been performed
on single tree instances, yet as more data are produced that requires users to
navigate through multiple tree classifications or to understand the complex
interaction of several tree structures, an increasing number of situations
call for the analysis and comparison of multiple tree structures – tasks to
which IV techniques can also be successfully applied.
There have been attempts to categorise tree visualisation literature by
criteria such as layout style, interaction technique and data type in previous
survey papers. Again, however, most of them concern themselves with
only the visualisation of single trees. Noik1 provides an early survey and
classification system of graph presentation techniques, including trees,
primarily focused on classifying by focusing and filtering attributes, and
is too early for multiple tree visualisations to have registered in the literature.
Later, Herman et al2 surveyed the graph visualisation literature from
an IV perspective, grouping techniques by interaction and layout style
rather than through the more formal algorithmic perspective favoured in
traditional graph drawing domains. Their examples cover mostly restricted
graphs including trees along with directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) and other
graphs derived from general graphs. As with Noik, the survey does not
include any examples of multiple tree visualisations due to the survey now
being several years old. More recently, PhD and Masters’ theses regarding
tree visualisation such as Nguyen3 and Nussbaumer4 include background
chapters summarising the state-of-the-art at the time, but again cover only
single tree visualisations.