How Information Visualization Novices Construct Visualizations
Lars Grammel, Melanie Tory and Margaret-Anne Storey
Abstract—It remains challenging for information visualization novices to rapidly construct visualizations during exploratory data
analysis. We conducted an exploratory laboratory study in which information visualization novices explored fictitious sales data by
communicating visualization specifications to a human mediator, who rapidly constructed the visualizations using commercial
visualization software. We found that three activities were central to the iterative visualization construction process: data attribute
selection, visual template selection, and visual mapping specification. The major barriers faced by the participants were translating
questions into data attributes, designing visual mappings, and interpreting the visualizations. Partial specification was common, and
the participants used simple heuristics and preferred visualizations they were already familiar with, such as bar, line and pie charts.
From our observations, we derived abstract models that describe barriers in the data exploration process and uncovered how
information visualization novices think about visualization specifications. Our findings support the need for tools that suggest
potential visualizations and support iterative refinement, that provide explanations and help with learning, and that are tightly
integrated into tool support for the overall visual analytics process.
Index Terms—Empirical study, visualization, visualization construction, visual analytics, visual mapping, novices.
1 INTRODUCTION
Information visualization (InfoVis) is becoming a mainstream
technology that is being utilized by InfoVis novices – those who are
not familiar with information visualization and visual data analysis.
Sites such as Many Eyes [37] enable anyone to upload and visualize
data, and systems that fall under the umbrella of casual InfoVis
provide visualizations in everyday life [30]. Despite this progress,
the vision of InfoVis for and by the masses has not yet been realized
[14, 17]. Part of the reason for this is that constructing perceptually
effective visualizations, and even interpreting moderately complex
ones, remains challenging for InfoVis novices.
Interacting with visualizations has become easier with recent tools
such as Many Eyes, Tableau etc. However, many potential users that
could benefit from these tools lack visualization construction
expertise. In particular, it has been noted that users have difficulties
deciding how to map data elements to graphic attributes [14]. This is
especially problematic because selecting inappropriate visual
mappings can impede analysis and even result in misleading
conclusions. It is therefore important to provide tool support that
enables InfoVis novices to design good visual mappings easily [14].
To create such tool support, we need to understand how InfoVis
novices think about and express visual mappings, which barriers they
encounter, and how this impacts the sensemaking process. Once the
specific characteristics of visual mapping expression are uncovered,
we can build tools that specifically support this process, for example
by reducing discovered barriers. Such tools could potentially enable
a larger audience to leverage visual data exploration and analysis for
decision-making and insight generation, both in work and in daily
life.
While general models of the visualization process have been
proposed (e.g. [3, 5, 35, 38]), it remains unclear how these models
apply to visualization construction by InfoVis novices, and exactly
how a lack of visualization expertise impacts sensemaking. To
e