Visualization of Directed Associations in E-Commerce
Transaction Data
Ming C. Hao, Umeshwar Dayal, Meichun Hsu, Thomas Sprenger*, Markus H. Gross*
Hewlett Packard Research Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA.
(ming_hao, dayal, mhsu)@hpl.hp.com
Abstract
Many real-world e-commerce applications require the mining of large volumes of transaction data to
extract marketing and sales information. This paper describes the Directed Association Visualization
(DAV) system that visually associates product affinities and relationships for large volumes of e-commerce
transaction data. DAV maps transaction data items and their relationships to vertices, edges, and positions
on a visual spherical surface. DAV encompasses several innovative techniques (1) items are positioned
according to their associations to show the strength of their relationships; (2) edges with arrows are used to
represent the implication directions; (3) a mass-spring engine is integrated into a visual data mining
platform to provide a self-organized graph. We have applied this system successfully to market basket
analysis and e-customer profiling Internet applications.
Keywords: Visual Mining, Association, Support Confidence, Mass-Spring, Relationships
1. INTRODUCTION
Market basket analysis has become a key success factor in e-commerce. Effective market basket analysis
methods employ association [1, 4] and clustering [6] as methods of analyzing such data. E-commerce
transactions often are comprised of several products (items) that are purchased together. An example of an
association is that 85% of the people who buy a printer also buy paper. Understanding these relationships
across hundreds of product lines and among millions of transactions provides visibility and predictability
into product affinity purchasing behavior.
To date, there are many technologies that allow the visualization of associations for retail stores to make
business decisions such as product recommendations, cross selling, and store shelf arrangements. As
illustrated in Figure 1A, a common technique [7, 8], for visualizing associations is the matrix display. The
matrix technique positions pairs of items on separate axes to visualize the strength of their relationships.
The association visualizer from SGI MineSet [8] lays out the rules on a 3D grid landscape. Visual filtering
and querying allow users to focus in on selected rules. However, to visualize millions of association rules,
we have found that association matrixes are too restrictive. The number of rules shown at the same time
needs to be pre-decided and can only be a small range of rules (10-20).
An alternative to the association matrix, as illustrated in Figure 1B, is to lay out associations on a graph.
For example, LikeMinds [11] uses an individual purchase history to make suggestions to shoppers based on
a graph. However, when the number of items grows large, the graph can quickly become cluttered with
many interactions. Also, associated items may not be placed close together. The market analysis graph
from Insights’ Advizor [12] has achieved dramatic improvements by utilizing dynamic queries and
presentations.
Besides the use for data associations, graph visualization methods have been very popular in information
visualization. For instance, cone trees [17] and their hyperbolic projections [18, 19] are prominent
examples for web and file system visualization. Eric [15] used fast graph layout to display various types of
statistical data. A central approach to graph visualization are physics-based paradigms being exploited in
[2], [9], or [10]. Recently, clustering algorithms improved performance and scalability of physics-based
methods [20, 21].
2
Figure 1A: A Matrix Technique Figure 1B: A Graph – Based Technique
In spite of the advances in the field, it is still difficult to mine and visualize customer's purchasing behavior
from millions of Internet transactions. As the volume of e-commerce data grows and as the transaction data
is integrated into offline data, new data visualization associations are required to extract useful and relevant
information.
In this paper, we describe a system for visualizing associations of purchasing transactions for two and
more items.
2. OUR APPROACH
At HP Laboratories, we have devised a “Directed Association Visualization (DAV)” 3D system. To meet
the needs mentioned previously, we attempt to visualize the internal relationships and implications between
large volumes of transaction data. DAV maps the transaction items and relationships to vertices and
positions on a visual spherical surface. DAV uses weighted edges with arrows to represent association
directions and levels. In addition, DAV employs dynamic aggregation and hierarchical link lists to enhance
the scalability.
DAV integrates a well-known physics-based “Mass Spring” visualization system [2,5,9,10,14] into a visual
mining platform [3]. DAV uses a sphere layout to place the most tightly related item in the center and all
others around. The most tightly related item is the item with the highest correlation with other item. With
various association algorithms, DAV provides a self-organized graph. It consists of the following:
1. The “distance” between each pair of items represents support.
2. A “directed edge” represents the direction of the association. The color of the edge is used to represent
the confidence level.
3. A “cluster” is used to wrap around highly related items using an ellipsoidal surface.
3. COMPOMENT ARCHITECTURE
DAV is built on a Java-based client-server model. Its architecture contains four basic components -
initialization, relaxation, direction, and clustering.
Figure 2 illustrates the overall architecture of DAV. Each of the above components is described in the
following sections.
3.1 Directed Association Definition
In order to better understand what follows, we start with a few definitions:
An association rule is of the form X® Y where X