Although information retrieval techniques used by Web
search engines have improved substantially over the
years, the results of Web searches have continued to
be represented in simple list-based formats. Although
the list-based representation makes it easy to evaluate
a single document for relevance, it does not support the
users in the broader tasks of manipulating or exploring
the search results as they attempt to find a collection
of relevant documents. HotMap is a meta-search system
that provides a compact visual representation of
Web search results at two levels of detail, and it supports
interactive exploration via nested sorting of Web
search results based on query term frequencies. An evaluation
of the search results for a set of vague queries
has shown that the re-sorted search results can provide
a higher portion of relevant documents among the top
search results. User studies show an increase in speed
and effectiveness and a reduction in missed documents
when comparing HotMap to the list-based representation
used by Google. Subjective measures were positive,
and users showed a preference for the HotMap interface.
These results provide evidence for the utility of nextgeneration
Web search results interfaces that promote
interactive search results exploration.
In recent years, a significant amount of research has been
devoted to the creation ofWeb search engines that can index
billions of documents and return the search results in fractions
of a second. A prime example of this are the Web information
retrieval techniques developed by Google (Brin &
Page, 1998; Ghemawat, Gobioff, & Leung, 2003). However,
the presentation of Web search results has remained
essentially unchanged since the early days of Web search.
Commonly, the search results are presented in a list-based
Received April 30, 2007; revised April 8, 2008; accepted May 14, 2008
© 2008 ASIS&T • Published online 19 September 2008 in Wiley Inter-
Science (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/asi.20957
format, with each document being represented by its title, a
snippet containing the query terms in context, and its URL.
This simple list-based representation provides the search
results in a clear and effective manner for determining the relevance
of individual document surrogates. However, studies
have found thatWeb searchers seldom venture past the third
page of the search results (Silverstein, Henzinger, Marais, &
Moricz, 1999; Spink,Wolfram, Jansen,&Saracevic, 2001). If
the users are able to craft an effective query, they may be able
to find enough relevant documents in the first few pages to
satisfy their information needs. However, when vague or misleading
queries are provided, it is more common for the users
to either reformulate their query or give up rather than continue
to evaluate a set of seemingly non-relevant document
surrogates.