A Pool of Topics: Interactive Relational Topic
Visualization for Information Discovery
Inessa Seifert and Michael Kruppa
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI GmbH),
Alt-Moabit 91c, Berlin, 10559, Germany
inessa.seifert@dfki.de, michael.kruppa@dfki.de
http://www.dfki.de
Abstract. In this paper, we present a novel relational visualization that supports
people at information discovery tasks in digital libraries. This visualization
displays search query results structured into topics and highlights the
intersections between them. The proposed visual representation introduces
interactive drag-and-drop operations for manipulation of the generated topics.
These operations mirror the human online searching strategies that involve
boolean AND, OR, and NOT operators. In doing so, the information seeker can
refine (or relax) a search query in an interactive way during a focusing or a
defocusing phase. The intersections of topics are made explicitly visible to
enable the information seeker to avoid frustrating “no hits” situations.
Keywords: information visualization, boolean operators, information
discovery, online search strategies.
1 Introduction
Modern digital libraries provide a seamless access to a vast amount of scientific
literature. The amount of information available on the Internet has tremendously
increased over the past years. Retrieving an article of a known title (or an author) is
sufficiently fast and easy today. However, finding appropriate literature on a topic the
information seeker is not familiar with is a time consuming task. During information
seeking and discovery tasks, the lack of domain specific knowledge leads to
underdetermined and unclear search goals that are reflected in the definition of vague
search queries. Such search queries contribute to a huge number of resulting hits.
Examining a great amount of scientific literature is a time consuming endeavor.
Therefore, such vaguely defined queries are usually followed by a more focused
formulation of different search terms combined with boolean AND, OR, and NOT
operators. Yet, too many, or too specific search terms often deliver no results1. In such
situations, people try to broaden their search goals by returning to less specified
queries. The information seeking process encompasses series of focusing phases that
1 up to 30-50% of queries containing boolean operators together with precisely defined search
terms deliver no results [1,2]
M.L. Huang et al. (eds.), Visual Information Communication, 195
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-0312-9_13, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010
are followed by defocusing phases, in which people examine the retrieved hits, learn
more about the topic, and continuously change their attitude toward the search goals.
In this paper, we present a novel relational visualization approach that displays
query results structured into topics and highlights the intersections between them. The
proposed visual representation introduces interactive drag-and-drop operations for
manipulation of the generated topics. These operations mirror the logical AND, OR,
and NOT operators that enable the information seeker to refine (or relax) the search
queries during a search session. The intersections of topics are made explicitly visible
to enable the information seeker to avoid frustrating “no hits” situations.
2 Information Seeking
Information seeking is a complex and cognitively demanding task that has a close
relation to learning and problem solving [3].
Fig. 1. Information seeking process
The information seeker starts with an initial concept of the search goal (Fig. 1, step
1) that is derived from the prior knowledge about the problem domain and defines an
initial search query (Fig. 1, step 2). Based on the new knowledge acquired from the
analysis of the query results (Fig. 1, step 3), people think of new concepts, revise their
search goals, and formulate new queries. The search goals as well as criteria for
assessing the relevance of articles from the query results (Fig. 1, steps 4 and 5) evolve
during the information seeking process and cannot be specified in advance [4].
Having no specific well-defined goal and also no specific criteria for determining the
solution quality, information seeking is regarded as an ill-structured problem [5]. The
information seeking process terminates as soon as a user finds appropriate articles or
decides to interrupt the search.
Looking at the information seeking process from the problem solving point of
view, we have to identify the dimensions of the problem domain, possible actions that
196 I. Seifert and M. Kruppa
people can perform during the search to reach a new problem solving state, as well as
search strategies that help people to reduce the amount of information they have to
process.
2.1 Dimensions
A scientific article is characterized by the meta-data that makes it unique: title,
author(s), editor(s), year, publishing source (e.g., the name of the journal, or
conference proceedings, volume, issuer), abstract, and its text. Some digital libraries
(e.g., ACM2, CiteSeer3) provide further information such as keywords, categories, and
links to the referenced articles.
In the following, we will discuss possible search paths resulting from the
information choices accessible to the information seeker.
Each article is distinguished by a title, a short description (i.e., abstract), and its
text. These attributes can contain specific words that trigger the formulation of refined
search queries. Author names are usually augmented with contact information, such
as e-mail and author’s affiliation, i.e., name and address of an institution. Familiarity
with the work of a specific author as well as the reputation of a scientific institution
are important factors that can guide the information seeker to the publications of a
particular author, groups of scientists, or research institutions [6,7]. A year is derived
from the publishing date of an article in a scientific journal or a conference
proceeding that represents a source. Examining articles that belong to a particular
conference proceeding or a journal is another path that can be taken by the
information seeker to continue the search. Referenced articles can provide even more
hints about where further information about specific topics can be found.
The variety of the illustrated possibilities to follow different search paths leads to a
vast growth of the search space. To reduce the amount of information to be processed
and to facilitate the search, publications contained in a digital library are structured
into different categories and augmented with key words.
Categories are traditionally maintained by librarians who are responsible for the
creation and preparation of literature catalogs. Modern data mining and clustering
methods automatically structure query results into different clusters and accordingly
label them with frequently occurring terms, i.e., topics [8].