Multi-hierarchy Information Visualization Research
Based on Three-Dimensional Display of Products System
Zhou Hui and Hou WenJun
Automation School of Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing 100876, China
Abstract. Currently, the information on the Web is countless, which is
throughout tens of thousands of Web sites all over the world. And the Web site
intertwined with each other through hyperlinks between documents. Regardless
of such a big scale of the Web information, it will continue expanding. How to
access to the information on the Web easily has become a problem needed to be
solved urgently. However, the way of accessing to the information is far from
satisfactory. Information visualization will play an increasingly important role in
helping people understand the structure of the information space, finding
information needed quickly and preventing the lost in the information ocean
effectively. The paper used the Multi-hierarchy information visualization on a
specific e-commerce web site, and established a three-dimensional products
display system. According to the analysis of users on business web site, the
establishment of a representative user model was established. In accordance with
the user model, system function was analyzed and integrated, and task analysis
was hierarchical. Based on the user's demand, the paper confirmed the content
and the way of the showing. Finally the paper designed the system according to
the information structure, interaction and information visualization.
Keywords: user experience, Information architecture, visualization, mapping,
Fuzzy Comprehensive Evaluation Method.
1 Introduction
With the promoting of the information-based society and the more extensive of the
network, information visualization has increasingly become to be the research focus
in contemporary information management field. Cyberspace is becoming the main
and foundational part of information systems. Information visualization creates a way
to comprehend information space characteristics of the network from a new
perspective. The core thought of visualization is that it introduces the reality of space
form to the Internet. It made a breakthrough of the space concept which has only the
characters, graphics, data and video in the original [1]. It made a new expression
space though combining a real space and virtual network stack space to form. This
expression reveals multi-dimensional characteristics of the information in cyberspace,
and made the network information visualized.
Information architecture emphasizes information organization and show, and then
made the objective knowledge space to be ordered. In fact, people acquire, use or
288 Z. Hui and H. WenJun
sharing external behavior and internal cognitive of information which decides in a
large extent whether information technology can play a role. So in the management of
information we no longer confined to technical aspects, but pay attention to people,
information and the interaction between people and information. Information
architecture expands the relevance through the user experience, and then achieves the
goal of Information architecture [2]. So it must consider the user experience, the
relationship among information resources, information space and users, to provide a
reasonable scientific resources space.
We achieve the goal of non-spatial information to the user's transmission through
interactive three-dimensional systems. It is in fact an effective process of information
feedback loop. Non-spatial information transforms into graphics through information
visualization system. Through the three-dimensional display system, we implement
the compression of the information visualization system signs, which resulting an
optimized, more effective way to expression information. In many cases, extraction of
information is through interactive, perceptual and cognitive. Therefore, the main
function of this system is to research and exploration. This is consistent with human
cognitive behavior. Each person has his own style in exploration and cognitive.
Three-dimensional display system provides it a great deal of flexibility [3].
2 Information Architecture of the Display System
For this article, Information architecture refers to the organization and classification
to the system contents, and visualization implementation of the system interface.
2.1 Goal and Content of Information Architecture
First we should understand and to clarify the system's mission and objectives, and
then meet the uses’ needs. We determine the system's content and functionality and
illustrate how to determine the organizational system, navigation system, marking
system in order to help users find the required information [4].
Information Architecture in the Information Organization goals embodied in two
aspects: First, from the view of the results, it is necessary to make the information
clear and understandable; secondly, from the view of the user, make the information
usefulness and availability and user having a good user experience.
According to the uniqueness of information, from the view of information use and
users understanding, we can attribute the content of information architecture to the
following basic process: conceptual design, organization of information content, to
generate information structure, the design of information interfaces, information
navigation, and information display and information dissemination [5].
2.2 Based on User Experience to Build Interactive Information
We consider Information architecture model from the perspective of users and
services. In user-oriented context, because of users often putting the system as a tool,
using it to complete a particular information access and communicate mission, so
Information architecture concerned about the main steps in complete their tasks as
Multi-hierarchy Information Visualization Research Based on Three-Dimensional Display 289