TimeSpace: activity-based temporal visualisation
of personal information spaces
Received: 29 September 2003 / Accepted: 2 June 2004 / Published online: 27 August 2004
 Springer-Verlag London Limited 2004
Abstract Users’ personal information spaces are characterized
by their content, organisation, and ongoing
user interaction with them. They are fluid entities,
evolving over time, and supporting multiple user activities
that may require different perspectives of the same
underlying information structure. Increasing storage
capacity of computing devices and ready access to networked
resources puts users at risk of information
overload, and presents increasing challenges in organising
and accessing their information. The hierarchical
model of information organisation currently dominates
personal computing, and is realised for the user in
interfaces that help to manage and access filestore hierarchies.
Such a model provides limited inherent support
for what users do—carry out a range of interleaved
activities over time. In this paper, we describe the
TimeSpace system, which provides perspectives on a
user’s information resources based on activities and
temporal attributes of the information. TimeSpace can
be used alongside, or in place of, existing systems and
models (such as the Microsoft Windows hierarchical file
model). User interaction with an information space is
non-intrusively observed and then represented automatically
in TimeSpace. Visualisations provide overviews
of user activity on multiple projects and detailed
views of activity within particular projects, allowing
navigation forward and backward in time. An observational
study of use of the system revealed positive user
views of the utility of temporal, activity-oriented workspaces
in real world contexts alongside existing tools.
Participants appreciated being offered a different perspective
on their electronic information collection, one
that visually shows the composition and development of
their information space. They were interested in using
the system for current and long-term work as well as for
archiving information, as the visualisations provide a
context for their work and give an overview of all their
work in progress. The ideas embodied by the system and
its visualisations show promise and raise a number of
issues for further exploration. In future work, these ideas
will be adapted and extended to support users in managing
their information spaces across multiple personal
devices, locations and time.
Keywords Information management Æ Personal
information spaces Æ Visualisation