Integrating Statistics and
Visualization for
Exploratory Power:
From Long-Term Case Studies to Design Guidelines
Adam Perer and Ben Shneiderman ¦ University of Maryland
Visual analytics (VA) is different from other
fields of human-computer interaction because
VA systems are designed to be exploratory:
the set of tasks users want to perform
might not be known. Evaluating such systems is
problematic because controlled studies might not
effectively represent analytical tasks. One such VA
system, SocialAction, aims to improve exploratory
data analysis of social networks.1–3 SocialAction
integrates both statistics and visualizations to enable
analysts to benefit from both types of analysis.
Statistics help identify important individuals,
relationships, and clusters throughout the network.
Network visualizations integrate the statistical
results, allowing analysts to dynamically
rank and filter the network. Visualizations simplify
the statistical results by highlighting patterns,
gaps, and outliers. Statistics simplify the
typically dense network visualizations, allowing
analysts to focus on statistically significant nodes
and edges.
In order to understand whether SocialAction’s
integrated approach helps analysts, we designed an
evaluation methodology to evaluate SocialAction
with case studies involving researchers who worked
on their own data with their own problems. In this
article, two case studies are presented that reveal
that an integration of visualizations and statistics
can lead to valuable insights during analysis. However,
there are few information visualization tools
that provide an integrated approach to data analysis
(for more on this, see the “Why Combine Visualization
and Statistics?” sidebar, next page). In order
to promote such an integration, we reflect on data
from our case studies and present specific guidelines
for VA system designers.
The Evaluation Methodology
Our methodology is inspired by the goals of Multidimensional
In-Depth Long-Term Case Studies
(MILCs).4 Although many
other methodologies for qualitative
case studies exist, we believe
this is the first long-term,
structured, and replicated approach
that takes into account
the unique demands of information
visualization users. (For
more on evaluation techniques
for information visualizations,
see the related sidebar, page
42.) Our methodology consists
of the following five phases.2