A Comparison of Several Key Information Visualization Systems for
Secondary Use of Electronic Health Record Content
*Francisco S. Roque1, Laura Slaughter2,3, Alexandr Tkat?enko4,5
1Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, The Technical University of Denmark,
Lyngby, Denmark
2The Interventional Center, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
3Department of Computer and Information Science, Norwegian University of Science and Technology
(NTNU), Trondheim, Norway
4Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
5Software Technology and Applications Competence Center, Tartu, Estonia
http://dsv.su.se/hexanord
*All three authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
An overview is provided of six information
visualization systems designed specifically for
gaining an overview of electronic health records
(EHR). The systems discussed all make
use of timelines: Lifelines, Lifelines2,
KNAVE II, CLEF Visual Navigator, Timeline,
and AsbruView. With the exception of
Lifelines2, the main user groups targeted are
physicians involved in direct patient care. Little
attention has been paid towards supporting
true secondary use of EHR contents, for activities
such as assessing quality of care, patient
health and safety monitoring, and clinical
trial recruitment. Future work on such systems
needs to address the complexity of EHR data,
missing and incomplete information, and difficulties
in displaying data with differing levels
of granularity.
1 Introduction
This paper provides an overview of several information
visualization (infovis) systems that have
been built for exploring abstracted information
from Electronic Health Records (EHR). EHRs are
systems that are used to document care of patients.
The records can include a wide range of data and
information, including medications prescribed and
administered, immunization history, laboratory test
results, allergies, radiology images, treatment
plans, and care notes. Currently, most EHR systems
implemented are proprietary and highly customized
when used by larger care institutions.
It is usually the case that only clinicians and other
healthcare professionals with direct responsibility
for providing care have access to patient data. The
suggestion of secondary use of health data is not
new and has been handled separately from the issue
of creating user interfaces and visualizations.
Safran et al. discuss the purpose of clinical data
repositories in their white paper and point towards
the goal of a national framework for the secondary
use of health data in the U.S. (Safran et al., 2007).
According to their definition, secondary use includes
activities such as analysis, research, quality
and safety measurement, public health, payment,
provider certification and accreditation, marketing,
and general business applications, while at the
same time taking into account the ethical, political,
technical and social implications of such re-use. De
Lusignan and van Weel highlight the challenges of
making use of clinical data for research, stating,
"The available research methods for working with
large data sets are limited; it is difficult to infer
meaning from data; there is a rapid pace of change
in both medicine and technology; and integrating
data without reliable unique identifiers is difficult."
(de Lusignan and van Weel, 2006). Prokosch and
Ganslandt have recently summarized the latest advances
in enabling clinical data re-use for research
purposes (Prokosch and Ganslandt, 2009). They
identify as key challenges the establishment of
comprehensive clinical data repositories, the establishment
of professional IT infrastructure to sup-